The Development of Calm 
=======================
                       
	 If there be none in front, nor none behind                               
	 Be found, is one alone and in the woods                                  
	 Exceeding pleasant does his life become.                                 
	 Come then! alone I'll get me hence and go                                
	 To lead the forest-life the Buddha praised,                              
	 And taste the welfare which the brother knows,                           
	 Who dwells alone with concentrated mind...                               
                                

Those were the words of a prince who longed to live in the forest
(Theragāthā, Canto X, 234, Ekavihāriya). Do we not all have moments when
we wish to have none in front and none behind us, moments when we wish
to dwell alone? It seems impossible to find tranquillity in daily life.
We have people around us the whole day, and there is noise everywhere.
The real cause of our restlessness, however, is not outside but inside
ourselves; the real cause is our defilements. We may not commit grave
crimes such as killing or stealing, but we think unwholesome thoughts
and we spend much time in talking about other people’s mistakes and
shortcomings. We harm ourselves in that way. Unwholesomeness is harmful,
to both body and mind. We can see the difference in appearance between a
restless person and someone who is serene and full of loving-kindness.

It is not easy to change our habits. If we are used to speaking in an
unwholesome way then we cannot expect to change ourselves at once. For
how long have we been accumulating unwholesomeness? Because of our
accumulated unwholesome tendencies we are hindered in doing good deeds,
speaking in a wholesome way and having wholesome thoughts, and we are
restless and agitated. We would like to have peace of mind but we do not
know where to find it.

Dāna (generosity), sīla (morality) and bhāvanā (mental development) are
ways of having kusala cittas instead of akusala cittas. The Buddha
encouraged people to develop all kinds of wholesomeness, be it dāna,
sīla or bhāvanā. At the moment of kusala citta there are no lobha, dosa
and moha and there is calm. When we offer food to the monks and pay
respect to them there is calm. There is not always opportunity for dāna
or sīla but there is at any time opportunity for the way of kusala which
is mental development, bhāvanā, and this includes: the study and the
teaching of Dhamma, samatha (development of calm) and vipassanā. Dāna
and sīla can be performed with paññā or without it, but for mental
development paññā is indispensable.

As regards the form of bhāvanā which is the study of Dhamma, we will
have more understanding of the teachings through reading the Tipiṭaka,
the Three Collections of the Vinaya, the Suttanta and the Abhidhamma. If
we study the Dhamma, ponder over it and also explain it to others, there
are conditions for kusala cittas with paññā . Both our own life and the
lives of others will be enriched. The study of the Dhamma will help us
to have right understanding of our life.

Samatha, the development of calm, and vipassanā, the development of
insight, are included in bhāvanā, but they each have a different aim and
a different way of development. The aim of samatha is calm. In samatha
defilements are temporarily subdued, but they are not eradicated. The
aim of vipassanā is seeing things as they are. The right understanding,
paññā , which is developed in vipassanā can eradicate defilements.

Through samatha one develops the calm which is temporary freedom from
lobha, attachment, dosa, aversion, and moha, ignorance. When we realize
how often in a day there are akusala cittas, we would like to develop
more wholesome thoughts. Samatha is a way of developing kusala cittas,
also at the moments when there is no opportunity for dāna or sīla.
Samatha is a means of developing a higher degree of calm, but one must
have right understanding of the way of its development and one must know
the characteristic of calm which is wholesome. Some people may think
that there is calm when they are alone in the woods, but is that always
the calm which is wholesome? Instead of kusala cittas there may be
attachment, aversion and ignorance. Thus, in order to develop samatha
one must have a very precise knowledge of the different cittas which
arise, otherwise one is likely to take for calm what is in fact akusala
citta.

For the development of samatha there are specific meditation subjects
(kammaṭṭhāna), forty in all[(40)](#FOOT40). It depends on the individual
which subject conditions calm for him. If one would try to use, instead
of one or more among these forty meditation subjects, any other object,
it would not help one to attain true calm.

Right understanding of the characteristic of calm and of the meditation
subject is the most important factor for the development of samatha. One
may think that samatha is a matter of just concentrating on one object,
but which type of citta arises while one tries to concentrate? Are we
attached to an idea of “my concentration”? When the citta is akusala
citta there is no mental development. Thus, it is essential to know when
the citta is kusala citta and when it is not.

What is concentration? Concentration or one-pointedness, in Pāli
“ekaggatā cetasika” or “samādhi”, is a mental factor,
cetasika[(41)](#FOOT41), which accompanies each citta. Its function is
to focus on one object. For example, seeing is a citta which experiences
visible object. One-pointedness or ekaggatā cetasika, which accompanies
the citta, is focusing on only that object. Each citta can have only one
object at a time and ekaggatā cetasika focuses on that object. No matter
whether there is seeing, hearing, a citta with attachment, aversion,
generosity or wisdom, there is ekaggatā cetasika accompanying these
different moments. The quality of ekaggatā cetasika depends on the citta
it accompanies. When ekaggatā cetasika accompanies akusala citta it is
also akusala, and when it accompanies kusala citta it is also kusala.

As regards right concentration in samatha, this can arise only if there
is right understanding of the development of calm. When there is calm
there is at the same time right concentration as well which accompanies
the kusala citta.

Can samatha be developed in daily life or do we have to lead a secluded
life? If one intends to develop higher degrees of calm, there are
specific conditions which have to be fulfilled, as we will see. However,
not everybody is able to or intends to develop higher degrees of calm.
If we have right understanding of samatha, there can also be conditions
for moments of calm in daily life. We can, in daily life, reflect for
example on the loathsomeness of the body or on corpses, which are among
the forty meditation subjects which can condition calm. For some people
the meditations on a corpse can be helpful to have less attachment to
sense-impressions. We all have to see dead people or dead animals at
times. When we have read about the meditations on corpses and pondered
over them there is a condition for the arising of wholesome thoughts at
such moments, instead of akusala cittas with aversion. We may remember
what the Buddha said about the impermanence of all conditioned things.

We read in the Thera-Therīgāthā (Psalms of the Brethren, Psalms of the
Sisters) about people who were restless, who could not find peace of
mind. Meditations on corpses and the foulness of the body reminded them
of the truth of impermanence. In the Theragāthā (Canto VI, 213, Kulla)
we read about the monk Kulla who had been infatuated with sense
pleasures. The Buddha recommended him to meditate in the charnel field.
The meditation on the putrefaction of the body was the condition for him
to attain calm to the degree of the first stage of jhāna, absorption. On
that basis he developed insight and attained arahatship. The following
verses are an expression of his attainment:

                     
	 Kulla had gone to where the dead lie still                               
	 And there he saw a woman's body cast,                                    
	 Untended in the field, the food of worms.                                
	 "Behold the foul compound, Kulla, diseased,                             
	 Impure, dripping, exuding, pride of fools."                             
	 Grasping the mirror of the holy Norm (42),                                
	 To win the vision by its lore revealed,                                  
	 I saw reflected there, without, within,                                  
	 The nature of this empty, fleeting frame,                                
	 As is this body, so that one was once.                                   
	 And as that body, so will this one be...                                 
 

Kulla was reminded of the truth and saw things as they are.

There are people for whom the meditation on corpses or on the
loathsomeness of the body is not helpful; they may instead be inclined
to the recollections of the Buddha, the Dhamma and the Sangha, which are
also included among the forty meditation subjects. Or they may recollect
“virtue” (sīla) or “generosity” (dāna), which are other meditation
subjects. The recollection of generosity may encourage us to more
generosity. In the Visuddhimagga (VII, 107) we read that the person who
starts to develop this recollection should make the following
resolution: “From now on, when there is anyone present to receive, I
shall not eat even a single mouthful without having given a gift.” After
he has given a gift he can recollect the following: “It is gain for me,
it is great gain for me, that in a generation obsessed by the stain of
avarice I abide with my heart free from stain of avarice, and am freely
generous and openhanded, that I delight in relinquishing, expect to be
asked, and rejoice in giving and sharing.” For this recollection one
must know the characteristic of generosity; one cannot recollect
generosity and one cannot become calm with this meditation subject if
one is not generous in one’s daily life.

There are meditations which are the “divine abidings” (Brahmavihāras).
They are: loving-kindness (mettā), compassion (karuṇā), sympathetic joy
(muditā) and equanimity (upekkhā). However, these qualities cannot be
one’s meditation subjects if one does not practise them in daily life.
How could one develop the meditation subject of loving-kindness if one
does not know the characteristic of loving-kindness as it appears in
daily life? We may have moments of pure loving-kindness but there are
bound to be many moments of selfish affection in between. Are we not
attached to people? It is necessary to know exactly when there is a
moment of pure loving-kindness and when there is attachment. There must
be right understanding which clearly distinguishes between these
characteristics and thus we see again that right understanding is
indispensable for samatha.

If one knows the characteristic of loving-kindness one can develop it
and then it can condition calm. This subject can help us to have kusala
citta instead of thoughts of ill-will.

Mindfulness of breathing is another meditation subject. In order to
develop calm with this subject one must have right understanding of it
and know how to be mindful of the characteristic of breath. According to
the Visuddhimagga mindfulness of breathing is one of the most difficult
meditation subjects and, since breath is very subtle, not everyone is
able to be mindful of it.

What is breath? What we call breath is rūpa, a physical phenomenon.
Rūpas of the body can be conditioned by one of the four following
factors: by kamma, by citta, by temperature or by food. Breath is
conditioned by citta. So long as there is citta there is breath
conditioned by citta. We all cling to our life and all the things we
enjoy in life, but life is very fragile. Life is supported by breath,
rūpa which arises and then falls away. When we have drawn our last
breath, death occurs and of what use are then our possessions and all
the things to which we cling so much? When mindfulness of breath is
developed with right understanding it can condition the calm which is
temporary freedom from defilements. However, the characteristic of
breath must be known correctly.

The Visuddhimagga (VIII, 197, f.f.) explains that breath appears where
it touches the nose tip or upper lip. It falls away immediately at the
place where it appears. One should not follow the going out and coming
in of breath, one should only be aware of breath where it touches the
nose tip or upper lip. The Visuddhimagga explains this by way of
similes, one of which is the simile of a gate-keeper:

> This is the simile of the gate-keeper: just as a gate-keeper does not
> examine people inside and outside the town, asking, “Who are you?
> Where have you come from? Where are you going? What have you got in
> your hand?” for those people are not his concern -but does examine
> each man as he arrives at the gate, so too, the incoming breaths that
> have gone inside and the outgoing breaths that have gone outside are
> not this bhikkhu’s concern, but they are his concern each time they
> arrive at the (nostril) gate itself.

If one follows the going out and the coming in of breath one’s mind
will, according to the Visuddhimagga (VIII, 197) be “distracted by
disquiet and perturbation”. Right understanding of the method of
development of this subject is indispensable. If one thinks that all
that is necessary is just trying very hard to concentrate on breath one
may concentrate with lobha, dosa and moha. If one enjoys watching one’s
breath and if one aims at feeling relaxed there is attachment and this
is not bhāvanā. Some people may be inclined to do breathing exercises
for their health, but, if one wants to develop calm one must know what
is bhāvanā and what is not bhāvanā. The aim of this meditation subject
is calm which is wholesome and thus there must be paññā which knows
exactly when the citta is kusala citta and when it is akusala citta.
When there are moments of calm there is no clinging.

It is extremely difficult to be mindful of breath in the right way so
that there can be true calm, freedom from lobha, dosa and moha. It may
happen that one takes for breath what is not breath, the rūpa
conditioned by citta. Some people follow the movement of the abdomen and
they erroneously take this for mindfulness of breath. If one has no
accumulations for mindfulness of breath, one should not force oneself to
take up this subject. There are many other subjects of meditation which
can condition calm.

There can be mindfulness of breath both in samatha and in vipassanā.
What is the difference between the object of mindfulness in samatha and
the object of mindfulness in vipassanā? In samatha there is sati which
is mindful, non-forgetful, of breath in order to temporarily subdue
defilements. In samatha the object of mindfulness is not, as is the case
in vipassanā, the characteristic of whatever nāma or rūpa appears at the
present moment through one of the six doors. There is paññā in both
samatha and vipassanā, but the paññā in samatha does not know nāma and
rūpa as they are, as non-self (anattā). The paññā in samatha knows when
the citta is kusala citta and when it is akusala citta; it knows how to
develop the calm which is temporary freedom from defilements. The aim of
vipassanā is seeing things as they are. In vipassanā right understanding
is developed of all nāmas and rūpa which appear, no matter what one’s
activities are. Also when one develops calm by means of mindfulness of
breathing there are nāmas and rūpas which appear and these can be known
as they really are: as impermanent and non-self. The paññā of vipassanā
knows nāma and rūpa as they are.

Several of the meditation subjects of samatha can be our recollections
in daily life and they can condition moments of calm. Some people,
however, may have accumulations to develop higher degrees of calm, even
to the stage of jhāna, absorption. When there is a higher degree of calm
ekaggatā cetasika or samādhi (concentration) which accompanies the citta
with calm is of a higher degree as well. Samādhi develops when there are
the right conditions, one cannot force oneself to become concentrated.

In the development of samatha there are three stages of samādi: the
preliminary stage or parikamma samādhi, access concentration or upacāra
samādhi and attainment concentration or appanā samādi, which accompanies
jhānacitta. When there is still the preliminary stage of samādhi,
parikamma samādhi, the citta is aware of the meditation subject, but it
is not jhānacitta; it is citta of the sensuous plane of consciousness,
kāmāvacara citta. Kāmāvacara cittas are the cittas which arise in daily
life when, for example, we see, think or wish for something. When
samādhi has reached the stage of access concentration, upacāra samādhi,
there is a higher degree of calm but at that stage the citta is still
kāmāvacara citta, not jhānacitta. When samādhi has reached the stage of
attainment concentration, appanā samādhi, the citta is jhānacitta. The
jhāna­citta experiences the meditation subject with absorption; at that
moment one is free from sense-impressions and thus also from the
defilements which are bound up with them. The jhānacitta is of a higher
level of consciousness than kāmāvacara citta.

If people do not know about the different stages of samādhi they may
erroneously think that they have jhānacittas or they may doubt whether
they have attained jhāna or not. The jhānacitta is accompanied by paññā. 
If one has doubts it is clear that there is no paññā . Even if one has
no intention to cultivate jhāna it is useful to know about the different
degrees of samādhi. One might have cultivated jhāna in a past life and
if there are the right conditions, one of the degrees of samādhi could
arise. People who have not studied Dhamma may have confused ideas about
concentration and about jhāna. There is right concentration and wrong
concentration. When people concentrate on a meditation subject in the
wrong way, for example with lobha, there is wrong concentration. They
may, because of wrong concentration, have unusual experiences which they
take for jhāna. Or they may even take such experiences for the
attainment of nibbāna.

There are several stages of jhāna and each higher stage is more subtle
and more refined than the preceding one. There is rūpa-jhāna, which is
translated as “fine-material jhāna”, and arūpa-jhāna, which is
translated as “immaterial jhāna”. Arūpa-jhāna is more subtle than
rūpa-jhāna; the meditation subjects of arūpa-jhānacitta do not pertain
to objects which can be experienced through the senses.

Of the forty meditation subjects, some can lead only to access
concentration, upacāra samādhi, some to rūpa-jhāna but not to the
highest stage, and some lead to the highest stage of rūpa-jhāna. There
are four (or, for some people five) stages of rūpa-jhāna[(43)](#FOOT43)
Those who see the disadvantages of the meditation subjects of
rūpa-jhāna, which are less refined than those of arūpa-jhāna, develop
the meditation subjects of arūpa-jhāna. There are four stages of
arūpa-jhāna, which are: the sphere of boundless space, the sphere of
boundless consciousness, the sphere of nothingness and the sphere of
neither-perception-nor-non-perception. Perception in the fourth
arūpa-jhāna is very subtle.

Of those who develop samatha only very few can attain jhāna. Much skill
has to be developed in order to attain jhāna. One should know the
conditions for the attainment of jhāna and what can obstruct its
attainment. We read in the Visuddhimagga (XII, 8) how difficult it is to
attain the preliminary stage of samādhi, parikamma samādhi, or access
concentration, upacāra samādhi, to attain jhāna and to develop the
skills in jhāna in order to acquire supernatural powers.

People today want to experience something which is beyond this world
because they feel distressed about life or they are bored. Wouldn’t we
sometimes like to know the future? We may be curious as to what
fortune-tellers can predict about our life. Many of us read the
horoscope in the daily newspaper, and even when we say that we do not
believe in those things we cannot help attaching some importance to
them. Sick people who cannot be cured by a doctor go to healers who
claim that they can treat diseases in a more effective way than doctors.
We may well go to fortune-tellers, or to people who claim to have
clairvoyance, but we still do not know ourselves. We still have
defilements, we still have ignorance, we still have to continue in the
cycle of birth and death. So long as there are attachment, ill-will and
ignorance in one’s heart, true happiness cannot be found.

In the Buddha’s time people developed jhāna until they became quite
skillful and they even acquired supernatural powers. Those who have
attained the highest stage of rūpa-jhāna and of arūpa-jhāna and have
acquired “mastery” in the attainment of the these stages, can apply
themselves to the development of supernatural powers. The development of
those powers is extremely difficult; only very few of those who attain
jhāna can develop them. The supernatural powers developed by means of
samatha are: miraculous powers such as flying through the air, walking
on water, diving into the earth; the “Celestial Ear” or clairaudiance;
the power to discern the thoughts of others; the power of recollecting
one’s past lives; the “Celestial Eye” (clairvoyance), by means of which
one also sees the passing away and rebirth of beings.

We read in the Discourse on the Fruits of the Life of a Recluse
(Dialogues of the Buddha I, no. 2, 77, 78) that the Buddha spoke to the
King of Magadha about the recluse who had supernatural powers. The
Buddha said to the King:

With his heart thus serene, made pure, translucent, cultured, devoid of
evil, supple, ready to act, firm and imperturbable, he applies and bends
down his mind to the modes of the Wondrous Gift. He enjoys the Wondrous
Gift in its various modes -being one he becomes many, or having become
many he becomes one again; he becomes visible or invisible; he goes,
feeling no obstruction, to the further side of a wall or rampart or
hill, as if through air; he penetrates up and down through solid ground,
as if through water; he walks on water without breaking through, as if
on solid ground; he travels cross-legged in the sky, like birds on wing;
even the Moon and the Sun, so powerful, so mighty though they be, does
he touch and feel with his hand; he reaches in the body even up to the
heaven of Brahmā...

In Buddhism one learns to study cause and effect. People are impressed
by extraordinary things when they do not know the conditions that give
rise to them. Each phenomenon in our life has conditions through which
it arises. When we know this we are not surprised by strange phenomena.
Moggallāna, Anuruddha and other disciples has supernatural powers, but
they did not cling to them or take them for self because they realized
that those phenomena arose because of conditions.

Samatha is a high degree of kusala kamma and it brings about kusala
vipāka. Samatha can help people to be more calm. But defilements cannot
be eradicated by samatha, even if calm is developed to the degree of
jhāna. Nor can defilements be eradicated by supernatural powers. Jhāna
and supernatural powers do not lead to the end of ignorance. The Buddha,
when he was still a Bodhisatta, developed samatha, but he also developed
vipassanā in order to become the Fully Enlightened One, the Buddha.

In the Vinaya (Book of the Discipline I, Pārājika, Defeat I, 1, 4) we
read that the Buddha spoke to the brahmin of Veraja about the “three
watches” of the night in which he attained enlightenment. In the first
watch he recollected, by means of supernatural powers developed through
samatha, his former lives. In the second watch he saw, by means of
supernatural powers, the passing away and rebirth of beings. In the
third watch his defilements were eradicated and he attained Buddhahood.
We read:

> Then with mind collected…I directed the mind towards the knowledge of
> the destruction of the cankers. I knew as it really is: This is
> dukkha, this is the arising of dukkha, this is the stopping of dukkha,
> this is the course leading to the stopping of dukkha…In me, thus
> knowing, thus seeing, my mind was freed from the canker of sensual
> pleasures, my mind was freed from the canker of becoming, my mind was
> freed from the canker of false views, my mind was freed from the
> canker of ignorance. (To me) freed, came knowledge through the
> freedom; I knew: Destroyed is rebirth, lived is the Brahma-life, done
> is what was to be done, there is no beyond for this state of things.
> This was, brahmin, the third knowledge attained by me in the third
> watch of the night. Ignorance was dispelled, knowledge arose, darkness
> was dispelled, light arose...

The four ariyan truths can be known through vipassanā. How could one
know that nāma and rūpa are dukkha unless one is mindful of their
characteristics when they appear at the present moment? Only thus will
we know that they are impermanent and dukkha, unsatisfactory. This kind
of knowledge leads to the eradication of defilements.