Right Concentration 
===================

*Questioner:* Right concentration, sammā-samādhi, is one of the factors
of the eightfold Path. There is concentration in samatha and there is
concentration in vipassanā. What is concentration in vipassanā?

*Nina:* Samādhi is a cetasika, mental factor, which is one-pointedness
or concentration, ekaggatā cetasika. Each citta can experience only one
object and the function of ekaggatā cetasika, which is also called
samādhi, is to focus on that one object.

Each citta is accompanied by ekaggatā cetasika or samādhi, but since
there are many kinds of citta there are also many kinds of samādhi. When
samādhi accompanies akusala citta it is also akusala and when it
accompanies kusala citta it is also kusala.

There is sammā-samādhi or right concentration in samatha. It focuses on
one object: on the meditation subject which conditions calm. There are
many degrees of right concentration in samatha. As calm develops and
higher stages of calm are attained, concentration also develops.

There is sammā-samādhi in vipassanā. The sammā-samādhi of the eightfold
Path arises together with sammā-diṭṭhi, right understanding, and
sammā-sati, right mindfulness. Its object is the reality which appears
through one of the six doors.

*Question:* Thus, sammā-samādhi focuses on the nāma or rūpa which is the
object of mindfulness. It seems that we have to concentrate for some
time on nāma or rūpa; but in that way there could not be mindfulness
during our daily activities.

*Nina:* One-pointedness on the nāma or rūpa which appears does not mean
concentration for a period of time. Sammā-samādhi of the eightfold Path
arises with right mindfulness and right understanding which investigates
a characteristic of nāma or rūpa. It arises and falls away together with
the citta it accompanies. In vipassanā one does not try to concentrate
for some time on the reality which appears.

The development of vipassanā does not interfere with our daily
activities; whatever nāma or rūpa appears in our daily life can be
object of mindfulness. Is there no seeing now, or hearing now? They can
be object of mindfulness. When we are talking to other people, there are
nāma and rūpa appearing through the six doors. Why can there not be
mindfulness of them? We do not have to stop talking when there is
mindfulness of a nāma or rūpa which appears. Sati can be a condition to
speak with kusala cittas instead of akusala cittas.

*Question:* What should I do to understand the nāma or rūpa which
appears at the present moment? There is mindfulness in my daily life,
but there is not yet clear understanding of the nāmas and rūpas which
appear. It seems to me that there can be mindfulness also without
knowing characteristics of nāma and rūpa. Is that right?

*Nina:* When we begin with the development of the eightfold Path there
is not yet a clear understanding of the nāma or rūpa which is the object
of mindfulness. Moreover, there are many degrees of understanding. The
understanding is bound to be very vague in the beginning, but, if there
is mindfulness of nāma and rūpa more often, there will be a more precise
understanding of their characteristics.

In vipassanā you do not have to do anything special in order to develop
right understanding of the reality which appears, such as trying to
concentrate on it. When there are conditions for right mindfulness it
arises, and at that moment right understanding can investigate the
characteristic of the reality which appears; and there is also right
concentration which focuses on that reality. We should not forget,
however, that right understanding cannot be developed within a short
time, and thus a great deal of patience is needed for its development.

*Question:* Some people say that in order to develop vipassanā there
must be the development of samatha as a foundation. They think that when
concentration is developed in samatha it can help with the development
of insight.

*Nina:* Samatha is the development of calm which is temporary freedom
from defilements. There are sati and paññā also in samatha but these are
different from sati and paññā in vipassanā and they have a different
object. The way of development of samatha is different from the way of
development of vipassanā and they each have a different aim. In samatha
the object of sati and paññā is a meditation subject which can condition
calm; in samatha one does not learn to see the nāmas and rūpas which
appear as they are and thus detachment from the concept of self cannot
be realized.

People may be inclined to think that they should develop samatha before
they develop vipassanā in order to accumulate a great deal of sati, but
they should remember that sati in samatha is different from sati in
vipassanā. The aim of the development of vipassanā should be from the
beginning understanding, understanding realities as they are, as
impermanent, dukkha and non-self. This can only be achieved through
mindfulness of the nāma or rūpa which appears now, at this moment.

*Question:* In the case of nervous people would it not be better to
develop at least some degree of samatha before they develop vipassanā?

*Nina:* If one has accumulations for samatha one can develop it, but
through samatha one does not learn to be mindful of the nāmas and rūpas
which appear now, one at a time, in order to know them as non-self. How
could samatha then be a necessary condition for vipassanā?

There are no rules as to the types of kusala someone should develop,
because this depends on his accumulations. If nervous people were to
study the Buddha’s teachings and practise what he taught, they would
gain more understanding of the phenomena of their lives. This
understanding would help them effectively.

*Question:* I have heard people say that someone who is restless should
not study the Buddha’s teachings because it would make him more
confused. He should just practise, not study.

*Nina:* Everyone is confused before he listens to the teaching of the
Dhamma and studies it. We all have ignorance; because of ignorance we
are still in the cycle of birth and death. We have eyes, ears, nose,
tongue, bodysense and mind; we have lobha, attachment, dosa, aversion,
and moha, ignorance, arising on account of what we experience through
the senses and through the mind-door. But so long as we are ignorant we
do not know about these realities.

However, in studying the teachings and pondering over them we begin to
have more understanding of our life. Could a clearer understanding make
us confused? Moreover, how could one practise without study? If we were
to develop vipassanā without studying we would not know what the right
path is and what the wrong path. When people do not know the
characteristic of sammā-sati of the eightfold Path, they would
mistakenly think that sati can be induced, they would not know that sati
is anattā, non-self. The result would be that they become more attached
to the idea of self, instead of less attached. They may believe that
they can exert control over realities, that they can experience nāma and
rūpa as they are, that they can experience their arising and falling
away, whereas in reality they do not know anything. We should remember
that studying the teachings is a necessary condition for the development
of the eightfold Path.

*Question:* But should those who are just beginning to develop
mindfulness not go to a special place such as a meditation centre where
there is peace and quiet? Most people are so busy in their daily lives
that it is impossible for them to be aware. In a meditation centre they
can really set their mind on being aware and they can concentrate on
nāma and rūpa.

*Nina:* The idea of going to a meditation centre in order to set one’s
mind on being aware is motivated by the wrong view of self who can
control realities. A centre can be useful if one receives instruction in
the Dhamma, but one should not believe that one must go to a centre in
order to have more mindfulness. In the centre there may be attachment to
tranquillity and this is akusala, thus not helpful. One may become more
and more attached to tranquillity. When calm is disturbed there are
conditions for dosa. When people return to daily life they find that
they cannot be mindful, because daily life is not tranquil. Some people
think that they are “in meditation” while they are in the centre and
that they are “out of meditation” when they are leading their ordinary,
daily life.

In the development of vipassanā there is no question of “in meditation”
or “out of meditation”. There are nāma and rūpa no matter where we are.
Seeing now is not different from seeing in a meditation centre; seeing
is always seeing, it experiences visible object everywhere. Hardness
which appears now is not different from hardness in a meditation centre;
it is a kind of rūpa which can be experienced through the bodysense.
Right understanding of mindfulness of the eightfold Path is the
condition for its arising in any place, at any time.

*Question:* I have heard people say that someone who begins to develop
vipassanā should be slow in all his movements, he should also eat and
walk slowly, in order to have more mindfulness.

*Nina:* When you move your arm slowly in order to have more mindfulness,
what types of citta motivate the movement? Is there desire?

*Question:* Yes, there is desire for sati.

*Nina:* Thus there are cittas rooted in attachment, lobha-mūla-cittas.
At such moments one thinks of the awareness one wishes to have, of what
has not appeared yet. One is clinging to what may arise in the future
instead of attending to the present moment. One may be ignorant and
forgetful of the desire which has arisen and when seeing or hearing
appears there is no mindfulness of them either. Thus there will not be
detachment from the concept of self.

When one eats slowly in order to have more sati there is again clinging
to sati instead of right mindfulness. When we are eating, defilements
are bound to arise since we have not eradicated them. There can be like
or dislike of the food we are eating, but there can be mindfulness of
like and dislike so that they can be known as conditioned nāmas. No
matter whether we are doing things quickly or slowly, realities are
appearing through the six doors and sati can perform its function of
being mindful of them. Also when we are walking quickly hardness, for
example, may appear and it can be object of mindfulness.

We should not forget the second noble Truth: craving is the origin of
dukkha. So long as there is clinging to nāma and rūpa there will be
rebirth and thus no end to dukkha. When we in the development of
vipassanā cling to results, we forget the second noble Truth. For
instance, we may want to know within a short time the difference between
nāma and rūpa, such as the difference between seeing and visible object,
hearing and sound; or we may wish to experience the arising and falling
away of nāma and rūpa. But so long as we cling to obtaining the results
of the development of insight, there is no way to come to know the
truth. The eightfold Path cannot be developed within a short time. In
order to become detached from the concept of self a precise
understanding of the different nāmas and rūpas which appear has to be
developed.

*Question:* When there is more mindfulness there is more peacefulness
too. I am inclined to be contented with peacefulness and not to develop
a keener knowledge of realities.

*Nina:* When there is mindfulness one is at that moment removed from
akusala and thus there is peace. There is also calm in the development
of vipassanā. There are many degrees of calm or peace. When one has
become an arahat one is freed from defilements forever. Then one has
attained true peace.

One may be attached to calm which arises when there is sati. This kind
of attachment is a reality which can also be known when it appears: it
is only a type of nāma. We can see how deeply rooted defilements are: if
there is lack of sati one regrets the lack of sati, but when sati arises
one is attached to it. Awareness of all kinds of realities is essential
in order to become detached from the concept of self. If one is glad
that mindfulness arises one should not think that one has reached the
goal. Right understanding is the aim and thus one should persevere in
the development of a keener knowledge of the characteristics of nāma and
rūpa.

*Question:* In the Satipaṭṭhāna-sutta (Middle Length Sayings I, 10), it
appears that meditation subjects of samatha are also included in the
four Applications of Mindfulness. For example, meditation subjects such
as mindfulness of breath, meditations on corpses and on the
repulsiveness of the body are included in “Mindfulness of the Body”. Why
are the objects of samatha and of vipassanā not separated? I thought
that we should not confuse these two ways of mental development.

*Nina:* Samatha and vipassanā are different ways of mental development
and they each have a different aim, as we have seen. When one reads the
scriptures one will come across texts on the development of right
concentration which has reached the stage of absorption, jhāna. This
does not imply that all people should develop calm to the degree of
jhāna. We read in the scriptures about monks who led a secluded life,
developed jhāna and later on attained enlightenment. They developed
jhāna because they had accumulated the skill and the inclinations to do
so. Before the Buddha’s enlightenment and his teaching of Dhamma,
samatha was the highest way of kusala. However, those who developed
jhāna and then attained enlightenment could not have attained it without
having developed vipassanā as well. Some people in the Buddha’s time
developed both jhāna and vipassanā and then attained enlightenment, but
there were also many people who developed vipassanā and attained
enlightenment without having developed a high degree of calm first. The
Buddha did not set any rules with regard to samatha as a necessary
preparation for the development of vipassanā. The Buddha encouraged
those who could develop calm to the degree of jhāna to be mindful of
realities in order to see also jhāna as non-self. However, we should
remember that the attainment of jhāna is extremely difficult and that
only very few people can attain it. Someone who has accumulated the
skill and inclination to develop samatha to the degree of jhāna, has to
know the right conditions for jhāna and he has to know which factors can
obstruct it. He has to be aware of his cittas in order to know whether
the jhāna-factors have been developed to the degree that jhāna can be
attained. If he is not attached to jhāna he can, after the jhānacittas
have fallen away, develop right understanding of whatever reality
appears. Also jhānacitta can be object of mindfulness, it can be
realized as non-self. Anything which is real and which appears can be
object of mindfulness.

Out of his great compassion the Buddha spoke about everything which is
real. He knew the different accumulations of people and thus he used
many different ways of explaining the truth and he taught all kinds of
wholesomeness. It depends on someone’s accumulations which type of
kusala citta arises at a particular moment: there may be kusala cittas
which ponder over the true nature of realities, or kusala cittas with a
higher degree of calm, even to the degree of jhāna, or there may be
kusala cittas with mindfulness of nāma and rūpa, or even lokuttara
cittas which experience nibbāna.

Mindfulness of breathing and other objects which are among the
meditation subjects of samatha are included in the “Application of
Mindfulness of the Body”, because they can also be objects of
mindfulness in vipassanā. In the Satipaṭṭhāna-sutta, after the section
on mindfulness of breathing, the section on the repulsiveness of the
body, the section on meditations on corpses and after each of the other
sections, we read that one should contemplate the origination-factors
and the dissolution-factors in the body. In order to understand the
meaning of this sutta we should not overlook these sentences. The
contemplation of the origination and dissolution of phenomena is not
merely thinking about them, it is contemplation through insight. The aim
of the four Applications of Mindfulness is not calm which is only
temporary but the wisdom which can eradicate defilements. This wisdom,
insight, can only be developed through mindfulness of whatever reality
appears now.

All the objects included in the four Applications of Mindfulness can
remind us of the true nature of reality, of impermanence, dukkha and
anattā. They can exhort us to be mindful of what appears now. The
meditations on corpses can for some people condition calm, and for those
who have accumulated skill for jhāna, even calm to the degree of jhāna,
it all depends on the individual. However, in order to eradicate
defilements, also the person who has attained jhāna should develop
insight; he should with insight contemplate the origination and
dissolution of realities[(51)](#FOOT51). The person who develops both
jhāna and insight and the person who develops insight alone should be
aware of whatever reality appears in order to eradicate wrong view and
all defilements. We read in the Satipaṭṭhāna-sutta, at the end of each
of the meditations on corpses, that the monk should reflect as follows:
“Verily, this body of mine too is of the same nature as that body, is
going to be like that body, and has not got past the condition of
becoming like that body.” Also for those who have no inclination to
develop jhāna subjects such as meditations on corpses can be objects of
mindfulness in vipassanā: when they see a dead person or a dead animal,
they can be reminded of the impermanence of their own body. At such a
moment mindfulness of whatever reality appears can arise. We may not
have accumulations to reflect on corpses, but we can still think of the
shortness of life and this can help us to have less attachment and
aversion and not to waste opportunities for the development of right
understanding of nāma and rūpa.

There are many moments of forgetfulness of realities but we can be
reminded of the true nature of realities by the things we perceive in
our daily life. The “Repulsiveness of the Body”, for example, which is
classified under Mindfulness of the Body, can remind us to be aware. In
our daily life we can notice “parts of the body”, such as hair, nails,
teeth and skin. Is it not true that they are loathsome? Are they not
subject to decay? They can remind us of the true nature of phenomena.
When we reflect on the truth there may be moments of calm, but are we
contented to have only the calm which is temporary freedom from akusala?
If our aim is the development of right understanding and if we do not
cling to calm there can be mindfulness of whatever reality appears.
Everything in our life can urge us to be mindful of the nāma or rūpa
which appears now. When we look into a mirror and notice that we are
becoming older it can remind us of the true nature of the body. What we
take for “my body” are only elements which are impermanent and not self.
Are there not many things in our life which are ugly or unpleasant, such
as, for example, our own or others’ bad breath? Repulsiveness and decay
both in ourselves and in others can lead us to the most useful thing in
life: to the development of right understanding of realities.

The Buddha spoke about everything which is real, because the objects
which can remind us to be aware of the present moment are different for
each of us, as we all have different accumulations. It depends on the
accumulated conditions what type of citta arises at a particular moment.
It may be a citta with calm reflecting on impermanence, a citta with
calm to the degree of jhāna, experiencing a meditation subject with
absorption, or a citta with mindfulness of the present reality. We
cannot force ourselves to have a particular citta, then we are led by
clinging to the concept of self. Thus, there is no rule which kind of
kusala should be developed at a particular moment. Insight can be
developed of the realities which naturally arise in our life.

Everything within us and around us can remind us to be aware now.
Reflections on our own accumulations can lead us to awareness of the
present moment too. We may notice how deeply rooted clinging is; we have
accumulated it in countless lives. Do we wish to continue accumulating
clinging or do we want to walk the way leading to the end of clinging?
Even our akusala cittas can remind us to be aware of the present moment.

Sometimes we may notice that others have akusala cittas; we may notice
their attachment, anxiety, ignorance and doubt. Or we may notice that
they have kusala cittas with generosity and compassion. The cittas of
others are also included in the four Applications of Mindfulness, in the
section on mindfulness of citta. They can remind us of reality and thus
they can be the condition for the arising of sati. Sati can then be
aware of whatever nāma or rūpa appears.

There is not any reality which is excluded from the Applications of
Mindfulness. We do not have to do complicated things in order to develop
the eightfold Path. That which is closest to ourselves, the realities
within ourselves and around ourselves in daily life, can be the object
of mindfulness at any time. Anything in the world can urge us to develop
the eightfold Path, until the goal is reached: the eradication of lobha,
dosa and moha.

We read in the Kindred Sayings (V, Mahā-vagga, Book I, Kindred Sayings
on the Way, Ch II, par 9) that in Pāṭaliputta the venerable Bhadda came
to see Ānanda and said to him:

> “ ’The righteous life, the righteous life!’ is the saying, friend
> Ānanda. Pray, friend, what is the righteous life, and in what does it
> end?”
>
> “Well said, well said, friend Bhadda…Well, friend, it is just that
> ariyan eightfold way, namely: Right understanding, right thinking,
> right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
> mindfulness and right concentration. The destruction of lust, the
> destruction of hatred, the destruction of illusion, friend, that is
> what this righteous life ends in.”


