Factors of the Eightfold Path 
=============================

*Questioner:* It is important to cultivate wholesomeness, not only in
our actions and speech but in our thinking as well. It is, however,
impossible to think wholesome thoughts all the time because we have
accumulated many defilements. When we think of the virtues of the Buddha
there are at those moments wholesome thoughts, but we cannot continually
think of wholesome things; we cannot help it that unwholesome thoughts
arise many times during the day. How can we stop unwholesome thinking?

*Nina:* When we recollect the Buddha’s virtues and when we are grateful
for the Dhamma he taught out of compassion for the world, it is a
condition for wholesome thinking. We could visit the four holy places:
the place of the Buddha’s birth, of his enlightenment, of his first
sermon and of his final passing away. In visiting those holy places we
give expression to our deep confidence in his teachings and our
gratefulness for the Dhamma which even after 2500 years can still help
us now, at this very moment. The holy places remind us not to be
neglectful of mindfulness; they are conditions for many kusala cittas.

When there are kusala cittas there are at those moments no conditions
for unwholesome thinking, but it is not eradicated. Only by the
cultivation of the eightfold Path, which is the development of insight,
will unwholesome thinking eventually be eradicated. In the development
of vipassanā there can also be mindfulness of thinking which is
unwholesome. We may not like to be mindful of unwholesome thinking, but
it is a reality, it arises, and thus its characteristic can be
investigated. The Four Applications of Mindfulness or satipaṭṭhāna
include all realities. If we understand that there isn’t anything which
cannot be object of mindfulness, we will gradually realize that all
phenomena are only nāma and rūpa. Thus, when unwholesome thinking
appears why can it not be known as only a type of nāma? When paññā knows
the characteristic of this reality more clearly, there will be less
inclination to take it for self. So long as we are not yet arahats
unwholesomeness is bound to arise. It can only be completely eradicated
when one has attained arahatship.

*Question:* I learned that “right thinking” or “sammā-saṇkappa” is one
of the factors of the eightfold Path. Is sammā-saṇkappa thinking of nāma
and rūpa?

*Nina:* Sammā-saṇkappa is the cetasika, mental factor, which is
“vitakka” or “thinking”. Vitakka is usually translated into English as
“applied thought”. The characteristic of vitakka is different from what
we mean by the word “thinking” as we use it in conventional language.
Vitakka performs a specific function when it accompanies the citta. The
Visuddhimagga (IV, 88) states about vitakka:

> …It has the characteristic of directing the mind onto an object
(mounting the mind on its object). Its function is to strike and
thresh…It is manifested as the leading of the mind onto an object.

Vitakka accompanies many cittas but not every citta. It arises together
with the citta and falls away with the citta. When vitakka accompanies
akusala citta it is also akusala, and when it accompanies kusala citta
it is also kusala. When vitakka accompanies the citta with right
understanding (sammā-diṭṭhi) and right mindfulness (sammā-sati) of the
eightfold Path it is called sammā-saṇkappa, right thinking, of the
eightfold Path. When there is right mindfulness of a nāma or rūpa which
appears through one of the six doors, sammā-saṇkappa hits or “touches”
the nāma or rūpa which is the object of mindfulness so that sammā-diṭṭhi
can investigate that object in order to know it as it is. When right
understanding has not been developed yet, we may doubt whether the
reality which appears is nāma or rūpa. When there is seeing which is
nāma there is also visible object which is rūpa, but only one reality at
a time can be object of mindfulness. It is the function of
sammā-saṇkappa to “touch” the reality appearing at the present moment so
that right understanding can investigate its characteristic. Right
understanding needs right thinking in order to investigate the
characteristics of nāma and rūpa and to see realities as they are. Thus,
sammā-saṇkappa is indispensable for the development of right
understanding. If we understand the function of sammā-saṇkappa, it is
clear that sammā-saṇkappa is not thinking about nāma or rūpa.

*Question:* Can sammā-saṇkappa destroy wrong thinking?

*Nina:* Sammā-saṇkappa arises together with the citta which is
accompanied by right mindfulness and right understanding. It directs the
citta in the right way towards the object of mindfulness and at that
moment there cannot be wrong thinking. After the moment of mindfulness,
however, wrong thinking or thinking which is akusala can arise again,
but if one continues developing the eightfold Path it will eventually be
destroyed.

*Question:* I heard someone say that in order to develop mindfulness one
should stop thinking. Is this a right method?

*Nina:* How could we prevent ourselves from thinking? Throughout our
life objects are presenting themselves through the senses and through
the mind-door. Cittas which think of these objects are real. Why can
there not be mindfulness of thinking? Otherwise we will not see that it
is anattā, not self. The moment we try to control thinking it has fallen
away, it already belongs to the past. When there is awareness of a
characteristic of nāma or rūpa, there is at that moment no clinging to a
concept of self who tries to stop thinking or to control sati in other
ways. Awareness of whatever reality appears, that is the development of
the eightfold Path.

*Question:* We have spoken already about sammā-diṭṭhi, sammā-saṇkappa
and sammā-sati, but there are eight factors of the eightfold Path. Could
you tell me which are the factors of the eightfold Path?

*Nina:* The eight factors are:

- Right understanding, sammā-diṭṭhi
- Right thinking, sammā-saṇkappa
- Right speech, sammā-vācā
- Right bodily action, sammā-kammanta
- Right livelihood, sammā-ājīva
- Right effort, sammā-vāyāma
- Right mindfulness, sammā-sati
- Right concentration, sammā-samādhi

*Question:* What are the functions of right speech, right bodily action
and right livelihood?

*Nina:* They are three sobhana cetasikas, beautiful mental factors,
which abstain from wrong speech, wrong bodily action and wrong
livelihood. They are the factors which are sīla or morality. Right
speech is abstaining from wrong speech, which is lying, slandering, rude
speech and idle talk. Right action is abstaining from wrong bodily
action, which is killing, stealing and sexual misbehaviour. Right
livelihood is abstaining from wrong livelihood, which is wrong bodily
action and wrong speech committed for the sake of earning a living.

*Question:* How can I abstain from wrong speech? I find that when I am
with other people who speak in an unwholesome way I am inclined to do
the same.

*Nina:* So long as we are not yet arahats we will still speak in an
unwholesome way. But the Buddha’s teachings can be the condition for us
to have less akusala in our life. When people speak in an unpleasant way
about others or when they complain about disagreeable things which
happen in life we may be inclined to follow their example. But through
the study of the teachings and the development of satipaṭṭhāna we will
realize more often when there are akusala cittas. Gradually we can learn
to abstain from wrong speech. We may have compassion for those who speak
in the wrong way, we may try to help them to have kusala cittas instead
of akusala cittas.

*Question:* We may know this in theory, but I find the practice of the
teachings very difficult. I have spoken the wrong words already before I
realize it.

*Nina:* Through the development of right understanding habits and
accumulations can gradually be changed. But there is no self who could
change habits and accumulations. The right understanding of the Dhamma
and the application of the Dhamma in one’s life are conditions for
change. Then we can prove to ourselves that the Buddha’s teachings are
the truth; and our confidence in the teachings will be deeper.

*Question:* Can you give an example of right action?

*Nina:* When we are inclined to kill an insect which is stinging us, but
then, instead of having aversion, we abstain from killing, we are
observing sīla. It is not self who abstains, but the cetasika which is
right action performs its function.

*Question:* I know of someone who says that he cannot help killing. When
an insect bites him it is his reflex to kill it. Is the development of
right understanding a condition for abstaining from wrong action?

*Nina:* Right understanding of nāma and rūpa conditions us to realize
more often the danger of akusala and the benefit of kusala. At the
moment of mindfulness of a reality which appears through one of the six
doors there is kusala citta. Kusala citta cannot be accompanied by dosa,
it is accompanied by adosa. Adosa is non-aversion or loving-kindness.
Right understanding can gradually be the condition that kindness and
compassion arise more often. We will be more inclined to think of the
happiness of other beings. Should we cause insects to have pain, should
we destroy their lives?

*Question:* When one develops right understanding of the eightfold Path
do the sobhana cetasikas of right action, right speech and right
livelihood destroy wrong action, wrong speech and wrong livelihood?

*Nina:* The development of right understanding is a condition for more
wholesomeness in our life, but akusala cannot be eradicated immediately.
There are at times conditions for abstaining from unwholesome actions
and unwholesome speech, but, when enlightenment has not been attained
sīla is not enduring. When we are in difficult situations we may kill
and we may lie. The sotāpanna, the person who has attained the first
stage of enlightenment has no more conditions for committing akusala
kamma which can cause an unhappy rebirth. He has no more conditions to
transgress the five precepts. However, he has not eradicated all kinds
of unwholesomeness. He has eradicated wrong bodily action, and as
regards wrong speech, he has eradicated lying, but he has not eradicated
the other kinds of wrong speech. He has eradicated wrong livelihood, he
cannot commit wrong action or wrong speech for the sake of earning a
living. Thus we see that the development of right understanding will
bear directly on our action and speech in daily life.

When the citta is not lokuttara citta, supramundane citta which
experiences nibbāna, the three factors of right speech, right action and
right livelihood arise one at a time, depending on the given situation.
When we abstain from wrong action, we do not abstain at the same time
from wrong speech. At the attainment of enlightenment, however, all
three factors arise together while they accompany the lokuttara citta
which experiences nibbāna. They perform at that moment their functions
as Path factors which is the eradication of the causes of misconduct as
to speech, action and livelihood. Latent tendencies to defilements are
eradicated so that they do not arise anymore. Defilements are
progressively eradicated at the different stages of enlightenment and it
is only at the final stage, the stage of the arahat, that all kinds of
akusala are completely eradicated.

*Question:* Can there be awareness of nāma and rūpa while we abstain
from unwholesomeness?

*Nina:* There can be the development of right understanding in any
situation, no matter whether we have akusala cittas or whether we
abstain from akusala. We gradually learn that there is no self who has
kusala citta or akusala citta, but that these types of citta arise
because of their own conditions. Through the development of right
understanding sīla will become purer because one will realize that it is
not self who observes sīla.

*Question:* So long as one has not become a sotāpanna the observing of
the five precepts which include abstaining from wrong bodily action and
from lying cannot be enduring. There will be situations that one will
transgress them. As regards wrong livelihood, for some people it is very
difficult to abstain from it. I heard of someone who has no choice but
to kill chickens in order to earn a living for his family. Every day he
has to kill, but he says that he performs dāna, generosity, in order to
compensate for his killing. Can he compensate in that way?

*Nina:* We cannot compensate for bad actions by good actions, because
every deed brings about its appropriate result. The killing, which is
akusala kamma, may cause an unhappy rebirth, even if we perform good
deeds as well.

*Question:* But this person cannot earn a living in any other way. He
used to have another kind of business but he could not earn enough money
to take care of his family. Some people have no choice; they have to do
wrong actions for their livelihood.

*Nina:* Nothing in life happens without conditions. One’s accumulated
defilements cause one to have a profession by which one is involved in
killing animals or trading in arms or alcoholic drinks. These
professions are wrong livelihood; they are conditions for akusala kamma.
It is sati which could, one day, make a person change his profession
which is wrong livelihood. People may think that it is impossible to
change their profession, but if there is the development of right
understanding of realities there will be conditions for earning one’s
living without having to perform akusala kamma. As we have seen, the
sotāpanna has completely eradicated the tendency to wrong livelihood.

*Question:* What about people who are not trading in the things you just
mentioned, but who are what we call “in business”? I would think that if
one is to make a profit one cannot always be telling the truth. Should
business-men change their profession in order to be pure in their
livelihood? I know someone who was formerly in business but changed his
profession. He now works for a newspaper because he sees this profession
as an opportunity to serve other people better.

*Nina:* We cannot say that someone should or should not do particular
things, because whatever we do in life is dependent on conditions. There
is no self who makes a choice, there are cittas arising because of their
own conditions. People who are in business may perform akusala kamma, as
for instance, when they are dishonest and harm other people in the way
they make their profit. But they can have kusala cittas too. They may
abstain from telling lies even though they know that this will cause
them to have less profit. Thus, at different moments there are different
conditions for akusala cittas and for kusala cittas which arise.

*Question:* What about a professional soldier? Can he ever have right
livelihood?

*Nina:* He can have akusala cittas and kusala cittas at different
moments. When he kills others he performs akusala kamma, but he may also
perform wholesome deeds.

In the Sutta of the Highest Blessings (Mahā-Maṅgala Sutta, Sutta-Nipāta,
Khuddaka Nikāya) we read among others about the following blessing:
“Supporting mother and father, cherishing wife and children, and
peaceful occupations this is the highest blessing.”

Soldiers, however, can and should cultivate kusala kamma too. We read in
the Gradual Sayings (Book of the Eights, Ch II, par 2, Sīha, the
general)) that Sīha the general visited the Buddha and gained confidence
in him. We read:

> Then the Exalted One preached a graduated discourse to Sīha, the
> general, that is to say: on alms-giving, the precepts and on heaven.
> He set forth the peril, the folly and the depravity of lusts and the
> blessedness of renunciation.
>
> And when the Exalted One knew that the heart of Sīha, the general, was
> clear, malleable, free from hindrance, uplifted and lucid, then he
> revealed that teaching of Dhamma which Buddhas alone have won, that is
> to say: Dukkha, its coming-to-be, its ending and the Way. Just as a
> clean cloth, free of all stain, will take dye perfectly; even so in
> Sīha, the general, seated there, there arose the spotless, stainless
> vision of Dhamma: that whatsoever be conditioned by coming-to-be all
> that is subject to ending...

The commentary to this sutta, the “Manorathapāraṇi”, explains that Sīha
became a sotāpanna.

*Question:* I think that those whose profession is government service
have more conditions for pure livelihood. They do not have to think
about making a profit for themselves.

*Nina:* They may have many akusala cittas; they may have conceit, or
they may think of their own success. It all depends on the individual.
When we have chosen a profession, it shows that we have accumulations
for that profession. That profession is part of our daily life. During
our work we can develop mindfulness and right understanding of nāma and
rūpa. When we have more understanding of the Dhamma we can help other
people to understand it as well, and thus we serve society in the best
way, we contribute to peace in the world.

*Question:* But can someone who has to think of money all day be aware
of nāma and rūpa?

*Nina:* Do you handle money during the day?

*Question:* Yes, it is part of our normal way of life.

*Nina:* Should you not be aware of realities when looking at money? Do
you think that there is anything which is not included in satipaṭṭhāna?

*Question:* When I look at money visible object appears through the
eyes. When I touch it hardness or softness may appear through the
bodysense. But if I were aware only of those realities and did not know
the value of the banknote I would be poor very soon. Even though I
believe that awareness is very useful, yet I consider it to be a
different section of life. I lead two kinds of lives: my life of
awareness which I lead mostly at home, when I am alone, and my business
life in which I have to be practical.

*Nina:* Do you think that the Buddha said that there are times one
should not be mindful? He exhorted people to be aware, no matter what
they were doing.

*Question:* But awareness is not always practical. For instance, when I
am opening the safe in my office I have to remember the numbers of the
combination-lock. If I were aware only of hardness, motion or visible
object, I could not open the safe. I thought that only absolute
realities, nāmas and rūpas which appear one at a time through the six
doors are objects of mindfulness. I thought that there cannot be
mindfulness while one is thinking of concepts.

*Nina:* Why can there not be awareness when you know the value of a
banknote or when you remember the numbers of the combination-lock on the
safe? At such moments there is thinking of concepts, but is thinking not
a reality? Are there moments that there are not nāma and rūpa? I agree
that you have to be practical, but does that mean that there cannot be
awareness at the same time?

The Buddha’s teachings are very practical. The Buddha gave many
practical guidelines for laypeople so that they could lead a life of
goodwill and benevolence in their social relations. He advised them on
the means for both their material welfare and their spiritual welfare.
We read in the Gradual Sayings (Book of the Eights, Ch VI, par 4,
Longknee, the Koliyan) that, while the Buddha was staying among the
Koliyans, at Kakkarapatta, Longknee (also named “Tigerfoot”) visited the
Buddha. He asked the Buddha whether he would teach Dhamma to people like
him, who are householders indulging in sense pleasures. He would like
the Buddha to teach him what would lead to happiness here on earth and
to happiness in the world to come. The Buddha said that four conditions
would lead to advantage and happiness here on earth, namely, alertness,
achievement in watchfulness, good company and the “even life”. As to
alertness, he should be deft and tireless in his work, he should have an
enquiring turn of mind into ways and means, and be able to carry out his
job. As to “accomplishment of watchfulness”[(47)](#FOOT47), we read:

> What is the accomplishment of watchfulness? Herein, Tigerfoot
> (Vyagghapajja), whatsoever wealth a householder is in possession of,
> obtained by dint of effort, collected by strength of arm, by the sweat
> of his brow, justly acquired by right means -such he looks after well
> by guarding and watching so that kings would not seize it, thieves
> would not steal it, fire would not burn it, water would not carry it
> away, nor ill-disposed heirs would remove it. This is the
> accomplishment of watchfulness...

As to good company, the Buddha said that he should consort with those
who are full of faith, virtue, charity and wisdom, and try to be
likewise. As to the “even life”, we read:

> …Herein a clansman while experiencing both gain and loss in wealth,
> continues his business serenely, not unduly elated or depressed. He
> thinks: “Thus my income, after deducting loss, will stand (at so much)
> and my outgoings will not exceed my income”...

We read that there are four channels for the flowing away of amassed
wealth: “looseness with women, debauchery in drinking, knavery in
dice-play and friendship, companionship and intimacy with evil doers.”
The Buddha explained that there are four conditions for happiness in the
world to come: achievement in faith, namely, confidence in the Buddha,
achievement in virtue, that is, abstaining from ill deeds, achievement
in generosity and achievement in wisdom.

The Buddha would not teach anything which is not practical and
beneficial. There should be awareness not only of realities which appear
through the five sense-doors, but also of realities which appear through
the mind-door. When we are thinking of concepts, there can be awareness
of thinking. Can you help knowing the value of a banknote? Is knowing
this a reality?

*Question:* Yes, it is a reality.

*Nina:* Anything which is real can be object of mindfulness. Some people
think that there should be awareness only of some particular kinds of
nāma and rūpa, such as seeing and visible object. They think that
knowing what something is, as for instance, knowing the value of a
banknote or knowing whether the traffic light is green or red, is not
included in satipaṭṭhāna. Don’t you think that unnatural? I have heard
of someone who, while he is developing insight, believes that he cannot
recognize his friends or his parents. If one cannot recognize anything
while one is “mindful” it means that one could not be aware during one’s
daily activities. It means that if one were to drive a car and be
“mindful” at the same time, one would not know when the traffic light is
green and when it is red. That is not the right path. Recognising
something is a reality as well, it is a type of nāma which recognizes
something, it is not self who recognizes. The development of the
eightfold Path is the development of right understanding of all
realities of our daily life.

*Question:* I still do not see how one can lead one’s daily life while
one develops vipassanā. I have heard that it is forbidden to take
alcoholic drinks while one develops vipassanā.

*Nina:* No one can force another person to abstain from drinking, nor
can one force oneself, since it is not self who indulges in drinking or
abstains from it, but nāma, arising because of conditions. It is not
self but sati which keeps someone from drinking. When sati has been
accumulated more it is a condition for gradually becoming less attached
to drinking. However, only the ariyan can observe the five precepts
perfectly. Since at the attainment of enlightenment all tendencies to
wrong bodily action and to the wrong speech which is lying were
eradicated, it has become his nature to observe the five precepts.
People who are not ariyans may transgress them. For example, when there
are conditions it could happen that we kill in order to protect our
lives. However, if one learns to develop satipaṭṭhāna, it will gradually
lead to changing one’s way of life and to refraining from akusala kamma.

*Question:* Thus, mindfulness can bring about what I would consider a
miracle, a transformation in character, is that right?

*Nina:* People would like to change their characters but they do not
know how to do it. Would you like to see a change in your character for
the better? Is there a way? Everything occurs because of conditions. The
condition for a change in one’s life is vipassanā, the right
understanding of realities. However, a sudden transformation of
character cannot be expected. People can see for themselves that while
they develop the eightfold Path they come to know more and more their
defilements, also the subtle ones. When there is less ignorance of the
realities of one’s life it means that there is already a gradual change
in one’s character, even though enlightenment has not been attained.
