The Eightfold Path 
==================

*Questioner:* I understand that awareness or mindfulness is useful; but
I still do not know how to be mindful in daily life. I feel I have no
time for it; I have to do my work.

*Nina:* The development of insight, vipassanā, is precisely the
development of right understanding of ourselves, of our daily life.
However, it seems that people want to know many other things but not
themselves. Are we afraid of knowing ourselves? The Buddha pointed out
that knowing ourselves is more beneficial than knowing other things.

We read in the Visuddhimagga (XII, 82) that the Buddha so acted that
King Mahā-Kappina and his retinue were invisible to the queen who had
followed him with one thousand women attendants and who was sitting
nearby. We read:

> …And when it was asked, “Have you seen the king, venerable sir?”, he
> asked: “But which is better for you, to seek the king or to seek
> yourself?” She replied, “Myself, venerable sir”. Then he likewise
> taught her the Dhamma as she sat there, so that, together with the
> thousand women attendants, she became established in the fruition of
> stream entry (sotāpanna), while the ministers reached the fruition of
> non-return (anāgāmī), and the king that of arahatship.

The development of insight should not be separated from daily life; it
is precisely in our daily life that insight, right understanding of
realities, should be developed. There should be awareness of nāmas and
rūpas which appear in our daily life. Thus we develop the eightfold
Path. If people say that they have no time to develop insight they have
not understood what the eightfold Path is.

*Question:* What exactly is the eightfold Path? Is it the same as
mindfulness? Is it essential for the attainment of enlightenment? Will
it make us happier and does it help us to fulfil our duties better?

*Nina:* When we speak about a reality we should know what type of
reality it is, otherwise we cannot have a clear understanding of it.
Which ultimate reality, paramattha dhamma[(45)](#FOOT45), is the
eightfold Path? There are four paramattha dhammas:

- citta (consciousness)
- cetasika (mental factor arising with the citta)
- rūpa (physical phenomena)
- nibbāna

The eightfold Path consists of eight factors and these are cetasikas.
They are sobhana cetasikas (beautiful mental factors) arising with the
sobhana citta which is mindful of a characteristic of nāma or rūpa. In
being mindful of nāma and rūpa the eightfold Path is developed. At the
attainment of enlightenment the eight factors arise with the lokuttara
citta, “supramundane citta”, which experiences nibbāna. Then the Path is
lokuttara. When the factors of the eightfold Path do not arise with the
lokuttara citta the Path is “lokiya”, “mundane”.

You asked me whether the eightfold Path is the same as mindfulness.
Mindfulness, sati, is one of the factors of the eightfold Path; it is
called “sammā-sati”[(46)](#FOOT46) or “right mindfulness”. As we have
seen, sati arises with sobhana citta. Sati is sammā-sati of the
eightfold Path when it arises with the paññā , wisdom, which understands
a characteristic of nāma or rūpa appearing through one of the six doors.
Any time there is mindfulness of a characteristic of nāma or rūpa which
appears, the eightfold Path is being developed.

*Question:* Thus, the object of the eightfold Path has to be any
characteristic of nāma or rūpa which appears through one of the six
doors, is that right?

*Nina:* That is right. A person or a tree are concepts or ideas we can
think of, but they are not ultimate realities which appear one at a time
through the six doors. Only ultimate realities are the object of the
eightfold Path. Seeing is a reality with its own unchangeable
characteristic which can be directly known, without the need to think
about it. Seeing is a nāma which experiences visible object, that which
appears through eyesense; there is no person who sees. Hearing is
another reality with its own unchangeable characteristic; it can be
directly known when it appears. Hearing is a nāma which experiences
sound through earsense; there is no person who hears. If we learn to see
nāma and rūpa as they are the wrong view of self will be eradicated.

*Question:* I have learned that the objects of the eightfold Path are
those of the Four Applications of Mindfulness or “satipaṭṭhāna” which
are the application of mindfulness of the body, of feelings, of cittas
and of dhammas. Is sound included in the objects of mindfulness?

*Nina:* Is sound real?

*Question:* It is real.

*Nina:* Why is it real?

*Question:* Anybody can experience sound through the ears.

*Nina:* Since sound is a reality which can be experienced can there not
be awareness of it?

*Question:* Yes, there can be awareness of it.

*Nina:* Sound is an object of mindfulness or satipaṭṭhāna because it is
a reality with its own characteristic which can be experienced. If there
is mindfulness of the characteristic of sound more often, we will learn
that it is only a kind of rūpa which can be experienced through the
ear-door and which is different from the nāma which experiences sound.

*Question:* What about unhappy feeling, is it also object of
mindfulness?

*Nina:* Is it real?

*Question:* Certainly.

*Nina:* Thus it is object of mindfulness or satipaṭṭhāna. All realities
which can be experienced through the six doors can be objects of
mindfulness or satipaṭṭhāna.

As regards your question whether the eightfold Path is essential for the
attainment of enlightenment: it is essential, there is no other way.
When one attains the first stage of enlightenment, the stage of the
sotāpanna, the wrong view of self is eradicated completely. The clinging
to the concept of self can be eradicated only if we develop the wisdom
which clearly knows that all phenomena in us and around us are only nāma
and rūpa and nothing else but nāma and rūpa. Thus realities will be
known as they are.

You also asked me whether the eightfold Path will make us happier,
whether it helps us to fulfil our duties better. Our own defilements
make us unhappy and at times we find life very difficult. In developing
the eightfold Path we do not immediately eradicate defilements but we
acquire a clearer understanding of our life. When there is less clinging
to the notion of self, there is less darkness in our life. Right
understanding is to the benefit of both ourselves and others. When we
have more understanding of our own life we will also have more
understanding of others. Through the development of satipaṭṭhāna there
can gradually be more conditions for kusala cittas with kindness and
compassion. When we do our daily tasks with kusala cittas do you not
think that they are performed better?

*Question:* You explained that the eight factors of the Path are eight
sobhana cetasikas, beautiful mental factors. Do all eight factors have
to arise with the citta which is mindful?

*Nina:* Not all eight factors arise together when the citta is not
lokuttara citta, “supramundane citta” experiencing nibbāna. When
lokuttara citta arises at the attainment of enlightenment all eight
factors accompany the citta.

*Question:* What is the first factor of the eightfold Path?

*Nina:* The first factor is sammā-diṭṭhi, right view or right
understanding. Sammā-diṭṭhi is the kind of paññā which directly
understands a characteristic of nāma or rūpa, appearing through one of
the six doors. Without right understanding of nāma and rūpa and of the
way to develop the eightfold Path enlightenment cannot be attained.

We read in the Kindred Sayings (V, Book XII, Kindred Sayings about the
Truths, Ch IV, par 7, The Parable of the Sun) that right view is the
“forerunner” of full comprehension of the four noble Truths. The four
noble Truths are realised at the attainment of enlightenment. We read
that the Buddha said:

> Monks, just as the dawn is the forerunner, the harbinger, of the
> arising of the sun, even so is right view the forerunner, the
> harbinger, of fully comprehending the four Ariyan truths.
>
> Of a monk who has right view it may be expected that he will
> understand as it really is: This is dukkha…this is the arising of
> dukkha... this is the ceasing of dukkha…this is the way leading to the
> ceasing of dukkha.
>
> Wherefore, monks, an effort must be made to realise: This is dukkha,
> this is the arising of dukkha, this is the ceasing of dukkha, this is
> the way leading to the ceasing of dukkha.

We should know to what end we wish to develop the eightfold Path. Why do
you want to develop it?

*Question:* I want to develop it in order to eradicate defilements such
as anger, jealousy, stinginess, and all other kinds of impurities -in
other words, everything which is degrading and immoral.

*Nina:* People think that vipassanā can solve all their problems at once
and they believe that defilements can be eradicated immediately. But for
how many lives have we accumulated defilements? Since these lives are
countless how could we eradicate defilements immediately? So long as we
are not yet ariyans the aim of our development of vipassanā is to know
the truth about ourselves, in order to eradicate the wrong view of self.
We have to be so very patient. We should not forget the sutta about the
knife-handle (Kindred Sayings III, Middle Fifty, Ch V, par 101,
Adze-handle), where we read that the Buddha said:

> …Just as if, monks, when a carpenter or carpenter’s apprentice looks
> upon his adze-handle and sees thereon his thumb-mark and his
> finger-marks he does not thereby know: “So and so much of my
> adze-handle has been worn away today, so much yesterday, so much at
> other times.” But he knows the wearing away of it just by its wearing
> away.

Even so some of the wrong view is eliminated each time there is
mindfulness of nāma or rūpa, but we cannot see how much is eliminated
each day.

*Question:* But when there is strong attachment or when we are very
angry how can there be awareness at the same time?

*Nina:* When there is a lobha-mūla-citta (citta rooted in attachment) or
a dosa-mūla-citta ( citta rooted in ill-will), there cannot be a citta
with mindfulness at the same time, since there can only be one citta at
a time. But shortly after the akusala citta has fallen away there can be
kusala citta with mindfulness. The characteristic of akusala can then be
the object of mindfulness, and it can be known as nāma, not self.

*Question:* Can we not be so disturbed by lobha or dosa, especially when
they are intense, that awareness is impossible?

*Nina:* Are strong desire and intense anger realities?

*Question:* Yes, they appear, they are realities.

*Nina:* Then they can be known as they are. If one makes oneself believe
that it is impossible to be aware of particular realities, one has not
understood what the eightfold Path is: the development of right
understanding of whatever reality appears. Some people are so afraid of
akusala citta that they try to flee from the reality which appears at
that moment. They think that they should apply themselves to a
particular practice, such as concentrating on their breathing, in order
to regulate awareness. When they act in this way without awareness of
the reality which appears at the present moment, they are not developing
the eightfold Path. When one develops the eightfold Path which is called
the “middle way”, there should be awareness of any kind of reality which
appears, even if it is akusala.

We may be inclined to think that there should not be mindfulness of
akusala cittas, especially of those types we find particularly ugly such
as cittas with strong desire or anger. Why should we be worried by the
reality which appears, even if it is akusala citta? We cannot change the
reality which has already appeared, but we can know its characteristic.
It is useless to go on worrying about strong desire or anger. At such
moments there are nāma and rūpa. Why would it not be possible to know
these realities as they are: only conditioned phenomena which are not
self?

Through vipassanā we come to know more our akusala cittas, not only the
coarse ones but also the more subtle ones. Not only strong desire is
lobha, but also enjoyment of beautiful things is lobha. We cannot force
ourselves not to enjoy beautiful things since we have accumulated
attachment, but we should know that at such moments the cittas are not
kusala cittas but akusala cittas. The “middle way” is not forcing
oneself to particular practices in order to suppress attachment, but it
is knowing whatever reality appears. We should also know
moha-mūla-cittas (cittas rooted in ignorance) as they are. Most of the
time we do not realize when there are moha-mūla-cittas because
moha-mūla-citta is not accompanied by pleasant feeling or by unpleasant
feeling, but by indifferent feeling. We may not realize that when the
feeling is indifferent there can be akusala citta. When there are no
kusala cittas, there are not only many moments of lobha-mūla-citta and
dosa-mūla-citta, but also of moha-mūla-citta. We are often ignorant of
the nāmas and rūpas which appear, there are countless moments of
forgetfulness and ignorance. Moha is dangerous. The moha of today
conditions moha in the future. How many more lives will we be ignorant
of realities? Through the development of vipassanā we will realize that
we are still ignorant of many realities.

*Question:* I thought that the Buddha said that one should be aware
every time one is breathing in and breathing out. Should we not
concentrate on breathing?

*Nina:* So long as we are breathing there is still life. All through
life mindfulness should be developed. In vipassanā one does not select
any particular object of mindfulness. There can be mindfulness of
whatever kind of nāma or rūpa appears through one of the six doors; in
this way wrong view and doubt about the realities one takes for “self”
can be eradicated.

In vipassanā one does not have to follow any rule. One does not have to
concentrate on breathing; if one selects the object of awareness and in
this way tries to control sati, there will not be detachment from the
wrong view of self. When we speak of breathing, we are using a
conventional term of every day language. What are the realities which
can be directly experienced when breathing? There can be awareness of
phenomena such as softness, hardness, heat, cold, motion or pressure
when they present themselves through the door of the bodysense, and they
can be known as different kinds of rūpa. Nāmas and rūpas appear, but
there is no self who can decide of which reality there should be
awareness.

*Question:* Reflecting on what you said about awareness of nāma and
rūpa, I can accept and understand that there is no self, but I cannot
experience it as the truth. And sometimes I still feel that there must
be a self who directs the mind and makes decisions. Suppose that I
decide today to study the teachings and to observe the five precepts; I
find it difficult to believe that there is not an ego or self who makes
this choice, this decision.

*Nina:* So long as we are not ariyans, the wrong view of self has not
been eradicated; there are yet conditions for clinging to the concept of
self. Awareness of nāmas and rūpas will gradually lead to a clearer
understanding of what things really are. Then we shall realize that
decision-making is a type of nāma arising because of conditions. When
wisdom has been developed to the degree that enlightenment can be
attained there will be no more doubt about realities and there will be
the clear comprehension that there is no self.

In order to develop the right Path there must be from the beginning
right understanding about the way of development. If there is some
misunderstanding in the beginning one may go the wrong way for a long
time. It may be very hard to find the right way again. If one continues
having wrong understanding, for how many more lives will there be wrong
view?

*Question:* Is the development of the right Path just watching or
observing all the phenomena of one’s life?

*Nina:* Who is watching? There may be an idea of self who is watching
and one may not notice this.

The development of right understanding is not watching or observing.
When visible object appears it can be known as only a reality which is
experienced through the eyesense, not somebody, not something. When
seeing appears it can be known as only the experience of visible object,
no self who sees. When one pays attention to the shape and form of
something there is another type of nāma, different from seeing, and its
characteristic can be known too. All realities which appear through the
six doors can be object of mindfulness. Mindfulness is not self, it
arises because it is conditioned by listening to the Dhamma, by the
study of the Dhamma and by right consideration of it. From the beginning
there should not be an idea of self who is watching phenomena or who can
select the object of mindfulness.

A very precise knowledge of all the different phenomena which appear
should be developed in order to see them as they are, as anattā, beyond
control. This is the development of the eightfold Path.