Preface 
=======

This book was written in Thailand where I lived for some years. When I
got to know the Thai people, I was impressed by their generosity. In
Thailand one meets many people who do not set a limit to their
generosity, be they rich or poor, and one is inspired to be more
generous oneself. When one meets the Thais one notices their sincerity,
their tolerance and their wise attitude towards the problems of life. I
was also impressed by the earnestness and dedication of the monks who
lead a life of simplicity, “contented with little”, and who try to
realize the Buddhist teachings in their daily lives. When I visited the
temples in Thailand, I saw Buddhism being lived in daily life.

And so, I wanted to study Buddhism. We are inclined to think that
Buddhism is only a religion for people living in an oriental culture,
but when we learn more about it, we see that it is completely different
from what we first thought. We learn that it is in fact a “way of life”
which makes for the well-being and happiness of all people, no matter
what their nationality.

Through the study of the Buddha’s teachings, which are also called the
“Dhamma”, we learn to develop the wisdom which leads to detachment from
the “self” and finally to the eradication of greed, hatred and
ignorance. When there is less attachment in our life, there is more room
for unselfish loving kindness (mettā) and compassion (karuṇā) for all
living beings.

The way one has to follow in order to develop this wisdom is the
“eightfold Path”. Through the development of the eightfold Path we come
to know better the phenomena within and around ourselves; these
phenomena can be experienced through the six doorways of eyes, ears,
nose, tongue, body-sense and mind. They are continually susceptible to
change and they are impermanent. What we take for “I” or “self“ all the
time does not exist; there are only phenomena which arise and fall away
again.

In Thailand I experienced that “to reside in a suitable location is the
greatest blessing” (Mahā-Maṅgala Sutta). Thailand was the country where
I met the “wise person” who helped me to understand the Buddhist
teachings and who showed me the way to develop the eightfold Path. It is
a great blessing to live in a country where Buddhism is taught and
practised so that one can acquire not only theoretical knowledge of
Buddhism, but also the way leading to the realization of the Buddha’s
teachings in daily life.

The Buddha, who attained enlightenment and who had clear comprehension
of everything which is real, left us his teachings which are now in the
form of the Tipiṭaka (three “baskets”), the three parts of the Buddhist
scriptures, consisting of the Vinaya, the Book of Discipline for the
monks, the Suttanta, Discourses, and the Abhidhamma, the “higher
teachings” or exposition of realities in detail. The Buddhist teachings
themselves should be our guide in the practice. Some people want to
apply themselves to “meditation” immediately without first studying the
teachings and thus they do not know which result their way of mental
development will bring. The Buddhist teachings are so subtle; one needs
to study them thoroughly and to consider them carefully in order to
understand what the Buddha taught about mental development. Mental
development includes both the development of calm (samatha) and the
development of insight (vipassanā), but they each have a different way
of practice and a different result. If one does not follow the Buddha’s
way, but follows rather one’s own or someone else’s way, one cannot
reach the goal.

In this book I do not pretend to give a complete outline of the Buddha’s
teachings. My purpose is to draw the reader to the Buddhist scriptures
themselves and to the practice in accordance with the teachings. I want
to ask the reader to read this book with discrimination and to
investigate for himself or herself what the Buddhist scriptures say. By
our own practice we can prove whether the way we follow is the right one
for the goal we have chosen. If we intend to develop insight, vipassanā,
the result should be that we gain more understanding of the realities
which appear at the present moment through the five senses and the mind,
and less clinging to the concept of “self”. In the final analysis, the
reader will have to find out for himself and to decide for himself about
the path he wants to follow in his life.

I feel deep gratitude to Miss Sujin Boriharnwanaket who helped me to
understand the Buddhist teachings and who showed me the way to develop
vipassanā in daily life. The writing of this book would not have been
possible without her help and valuable advice.

Buddhism in Daily Life originated from a compilation of lectures for a
Buddhist radio programme in English which were printed and reprinted in
Thailand several times. Formerly this book was printed in two volumes
with the titles Buddhist Outlook on Daily Life (now Part I) and Mental
Development in Daily Life (now Part II). Jonathan Abbot and Susie
Whitmore were of great assistance in preparing the text of these two
volumes. This present edition has been reprinted in England after there
were some requests from English people. I want to acknowledge my
appreciation to the “Dhamma Study and Propagation Foundation”; to the
sponsors of the printing of this edition, Asoka Jayasundera and family,
Anura Perrera and family and Laksham Perera and family; and to the
publisher Alan Weller. Thanks to their assistance the reprinting of this
book has been made possible. I wrote Buddhism in Daily Life a long time
ago and I have since written Abhidhamma in Daily Life, The World in the
Buddhist Sense, and The Buddha’s Path. The last book gives a more
complete outline of the Buddha’s teachings for people in Western
countries who may not have had an opportunity to study Buddhism and who
may find it difficult to grasp the core of the teachings. Buddhism in
Daily Life reflects my own experiences when I first came into contact
with Buddhism in Thailand and became deeply impressed by the Buddha’s
teachings.

For the quotations from the Buddhist scriptures, I have used mostly the
English translation of the Pāli Text Society[(1)](#FOOT1). For the
quotations from the Path of Purification (Visuddhimagga), I have used
the translation by Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli (Colombo, Sri Lanka, 1964). The Path
of Purification is an Encyclopedia on Buddhism which is a compilation of
ancient commentarial material arranged by the commentator Buddhaghosa in
the fifth century A.D.

The chapters which I wrote in the form of question and answer were
inspired by real questions posed by people who were confronted with many
problems in the practice of vipassanā. They were posed by myself as
well. I found from my own experience that the practice of vipassanā is
very subtle; that the clinging to the notion of “self” and the desire
for results can easily lead us astray, that they can cause us to follow
the wrong path instead of the right path.

When I wrote Buddhism in Daily Life I thought of the many people who
want to know the truth about themselves. I find Dhamma the greatest
blessing in life and I want to share with others what I learnt from the
Buddhist teachings and from the practice of the Dhamma in daily life. I
hope that this book can help others to find the Path that leads to real
peace.

May the Dhamma be the greatest blessing in our lives,



Nina van Gorkom