The Teaching of Dhamma 
======================

The Buddha proved his compassion for men in his teaching of Dhamma. One
may wonder why it is especially the teaching of Dhamma that proves the
Buddha’s compassion. Are there no other ways of helping people, such as
visiting the sick and speaking kind words to other people in order to
make them happy? It is true that one can help one’s fellow men in doing
good deeds and in speaking kind words. However, it is not possible to
give them true happiness in this way. When one is kind to other people
one might help them in so far as one can make them feel more relaxed or
less depressed for a moment. However, there are people who tend to go on
being anxious and depressed, no matter how kindly one treats them.

The Buddha knew that the deepest cause of happiness and sorrow is within
man. It is not possible to give other people real happiness; one can
only be a condition for them to feel happy for a while. The Buddha
helped people in the most effective way: he helped them to have right
understanding about their life, about themselves, and about the way to
find true happiness.

His disciples followed his example and helped people by teaching them
Dhamma. We read in the Discourse on an Exhortation to Channa (Middle
Length Sayings III, no. 144) that Sāriputta and Mahā Cunda, while they
were staying on Mount Vulture Peak, visited a sick monk whose name was
Channa. First Sāriputta asked Channa how he was feeling, and then he
offered to give him the right kind of food and medicines, and to attend
personally to his needs if he wanted this. However, he knew that kind
words and deeds were not enough. When it was the right moment Sāriputta
and Mahā Cunda spoke to Channa about the Dhamma, in order to help him to
have right understanding about his life.

In the Discourse on the Analysis of the Undefiled (Middle Length Sayings
III, no. 139) we read that the Buddha, when he was staying near Sāvatthī
in the Jeta Grove, spoke about the eightfold Path which is the “Middle
Way”. One should not be intent on the happiness of sense-pleasures and
on the other hand not be intent on the practice of self-mortification.
The Buddha told his disciples that they should not say of other people
that they are walking the right path or the wrong path; he said that
there should be neither approval nor disapproval of persons, but that
they should teach them what is the right course and what is the wrong
course. They should teach them which cause brings which effect. They
should simply teach Dhamma. Dhamma means everything that is real. The
Buddha helped people to develop right understanding about everything one
can experience, no matter whether it is good or bad.

If one wants to eliminate defilements one should first understand what
are akusala cittas and what are kusala cittas and be aware of them when
they arise. Only when we can be aware of cittas when they appear will we
know them as they are. We will not know cittas by speculation. As we
have seen, cittas do not last. Citta arises and then falls away
immediately to be followed by the next citta. There is only one citta at
a time. Life consists of an unbroken series of cittas, arising and
falling away continuously. There is no moment without citta. There are
many kinds of cittas which perform different functions such as seeing,
hearing and thinking. Moreover, there are akusala cittas, unwholesome
cittas, and kusala cittas, wholesome cittas. An akusala citta and a
kusala citta cannot arise at the same moment since there can be only one
citta at a time. However, akusala cittas may arise shortly after kusala
cittas have fallen away, even during the time one is doing a good deed.
When the kusala cittas have fallen away, regret about one’s good deed
may arise. This is akusala.

In the Discourse on an Exhortation to Channa, mentioned above, we read
that Channa suffered severe pains. As he could not stand the pains any
longer he committed suicide. The Buddha knew that before the moment of
his death Channa had kusala cittas after the akusala cittas which
motivated him to perform this unwholesome deed. He was able to purify
himself of defilements after his deed. The Buddha said therefore: “He
took the knife to himself without incurring blame”. We do not know about
the citta of someone else from the outward appearance of his deeds,
because we do not know each different moment of citta. We can only find
out with regard to ourselves at which moment there is akusala citta or
kusala citta, and even that is most difficult.

Akusala cittas can be rooted in three different unwholesome “roots”,
“akusala hetus”. They are:

-   attachment (in Pāli: lobha)
-   aversion or ill-will (in Pāli: dosa)
-   ignorance (in Pāli: moha)

By the word “root” is meant the foundation of the citta. The root is the
foundation of the citta just as the root of a tree supports the tree and
makes it grow. There are many different degrees of these three akusala
hetus.

All akusala cittas are caused by moha, ignorance. Ignorance is, for
example, not knowing what is unwholesome and what is wholesome, and not
knowing which cause brings which result in life. There are many degrees
of moha. An animal has a great deal of moha; it does not know about
kusala and akusala, it does not know how to cultivate wholesomeness.
However, not only animals have moha, human beings can have a great deal
of moha as well. Akusala cittas arise more often than kusala cittas and
thus there are countless moments of moha, no matter whether we are
walking, standing, sitting or lying down. Moha can only be completely
eradicated when paññā has been developed to the degree that one can
reach perfection, that is, when one has become an arahat at the
attainment of the fourth and last stage of enlightenment[(9)](#FOOT9).

When the citta which arises is accompanied by lobha, attachment, and by
moha, the citta is called “lobha-mūla-citta”, or citta rooted in
attachment[(10)](#FOOT10). At that moment there is not only moha, which
is common to all akusala cittas but there is lobha as well.
Lobha-mūla-citta which has moha and lobha as roots is different from the
citta which is rooted only in moha, ignorance of realities. Lobha can be
greed, lust, selfish desire, and it can be a very subtle form of
attachment as well, a form of attachment one can hardly recognize if one
does not yet have the right understanding.

Lobha can be accompanied by pleasant feeling. For instance, when we
enjoy beautiful music there is lobha-mūla-citta. Then the citta is
akusala, although this kind of lobha is not as gross as greed or lust.
One might be inclined to think that whenever there is pleasant feeling,
the citta which is accompanied by this feeling must be kusala citta.
However, when there is pleasant feeling the citta is not necessarily
kusala citta; pleasant feeling can also accompany akusala citta. For
instance, when we do a good deed there can be kusala citta with pleasant
feeling, but when we feel happy because of beautiful music or a
beautiful view, the citta is akusala; it is lobha-mūla-citta with
pleasant feeling. We can be deluded about the truth very easily. We find
feeling so important that we cannot see anything else. We are unable to
know whether the citta is akusala or kusala because we pay attention
only to the feeling at that moment.

Lobha-mūla-cittas, cittas rooted in attachment, can be accompanied
either by pleasant feeling or by indifferent feeling. When we want to do
something such as standing up, walking, taking hold of an object, the
lobha-mūla-cittas which arise may be accompanied by indifferent feeling.
We do not, usually, have pleasant feeling when we stand up or when we
reach for a glass of water. We cannot help having lobha very often. All
people, except arahats are bound to have lobha.

The Buddha did not speak to those who still have defilements in terms of
“sin” or “punishment”. The Buddha pointed out everything which is real
and he explained which cause would bring which effect. The bad deeds one
does will bring about their own results, just as a seed produces a tree.
This is the law of cause and result, of “kamma” and “vipāka”. The Buddha
explained to his disciples that there should be neither approval nor
disapproval of persons, but that they should simply teach Dhamma. In
that way people will know what is real. Lobha is real and one should
therefore know what lobha is, what its characteristic is, and when it
arises.

Another unwholesome root is dosa, aversion. When the citta which arises
is accompanied by dosa and moha, the citta is called “dosa-mūla-citta”,
citta rooted in aversion. At that moment there is not only moha, which
is common to all akusala cittas, but there is dosa as well. Dosa appears
in its coarsest form as anger or ill-will. There is dosa when one hurts
or kills a living being, when one speaks harsh words, or when one
curses. Dosa is always accompanied by unpleasant feeling.

There are more subtle forms of dosa as well: dosa can be a slight
aversion when we see or hear something unpleasant, or when we are in a
bad mood. Dosa can be recognized by the feeling which accompanies it.
Even when there is a very vague feeling of uneasiness we can be sure
there is dosa. Dosa arises quite often in a day. We are bound to have
dosa when there is a loud noise or an ugly sight.

There are three “wholesome roots” or “sobhana hetus”, which are the
opposite of the akusala hetus. They are:

-   non-attachment (alobha)
-   non-aversion or kindness (adosa)
-   wisdom (amoha or paññā )

Kusala cittas are not accompanied by lobha, dosa or moha. They are
always accompanied by alobha, non-attachment, and adosa, non-aversion,
but not always by paññā . Thus, citta can be kusala without wisdom
(paññā ). One can, for example, help other people without understanding
that helping is kusala and that wholesome deeds bring pleasant results.
However, when there is paññā the citta has a higher degree of
wholesomeness. If one observes the precepts[(11)](#FOOT11) only because
one considers them as rules, prescribed in the teachings, without any
understanding of the reasons for those precepts, ill deeds can be
suppressed, but not at all times. If the temptations are too strong one
will transgress the precepts. If one has understanding of unwholesome
deeds and wholesome deeds, and knows the effect of those deeds, this
understanding is a condition for observing the precepts more often. We
can develop more wholesomeness in understanding realities, in
understanding their causes and effects.

Everyone, except the arahat, has both akusala cittas and kusala cittas.
Each citta arises because of the appropriate conditions. Cittas cannot
arise without conditions. It depends on various conditions whether there
will be akusala citta or kusala citta. We all have accumulated
conditions for both unwholesomeness and wholesomeness. If the present
citta is akusala one accumulates a condition for more unwholesomeness
and if the present citta is kusala one accumulates a condition for more
wholesomeness. For example, when we have a slight feeling of aversion,
there is dosa-mūla-citta. If dosa-mūla-cittas occur quite often, we
accumulate dosa and dosa becomes a habit. If one is easily inclined to
strong dosa it can motivate unwholesome deeds and unwholesome speech.

One may wonder how one can accumulate unwholesomeness and wholesomeness,
as each citta which arises falls away completely. Each citta which
arises falls away completely but it conditions the succeeding citta.
Cittas arise and fall away in succession. That is the reason why past
accumulations can go on from one moment to the next moment. If we
understand how different people’s accumulations are we will be less
inclined to blame other people when they do wrong. We will try to help
them to have right understanding of the accumulation of kusala and
akusala. If we have more right understanding of the conditions which
make us act the way we do we will be able to lead a more wholesome life.

One may wonder what the Buddha taught about the will or intention which
motivates ill deeds and good deeds. Is there no “free will” which can
direct one’s actions, speech and thinking? When we think of a “free
will”, we generally think of a “self” who has control over one’s
decisions to do good or to do wrong. However, cittas arise because of
their own conditions; there is no “self” who can let cittas arise at
will.

The Pāli term “kamma” literally means action. In reality kamma is
intention or volition. It is not that which is generally understood by
“free will”. Kamma does not last, it arises and falls away with the
citta. Thus, one should not take it for “self” or as belonging to a
“self”. Kusala kamma or akusala kamma is volition which motivates good
or bad deeds. For example, there is akusala kamma through the body when
one hits someone; there is akusala kamma through speech when one speaks
harsh words or when one curses someone; there is akusala kamma through
the mind when one has the intention to take away something which belongs
to someone else, or when one plans to kill someone.

The Buddha taught that everyone will experience the result of the kamma
he has performed; one will reap what one has sown. Kamma is the cause
which produces its result. The mental result of kamma is a type of citta
which is called “vipākacitta”. Akusala kamma will bring an unpleasant
result or akusala vipākacitta; kusala kamma will bring a pleasant result
or kusala vipākacitta.

People are born with different mental capacities, with different bodily
features and in different circumstances. In the Discourse on the Lesser
Analysis of Deeds (Middle Length Sayings III, no. 135) we read that,
when the Buddha was staying near Sāvatthī in the Jeta Grove, the brahman
Subha asked him what the cause was of the differences among human
beings:

> “Now, good Gotama, what is the cause, what is the reason that lowness
> and excellence are to be seen among human beings while they are in
> human form? For, good Gotama, human beings of short lifespan are to be
> seen and those of long lifespan; those of many and those of few
> illnesses; those who are ugly, those who are beautiful; those who are
> of little account, those of great account; those who are poor, those
> who are wealthy; those who are of lowly families, those of high
> families; those who are weak in wisdom, those who are full of wisdom.”

The Buddha answered Subha:

> “Deeds (kamma) are one’s own, brahman youth, beings are heirs to
> deeds, deeds are matrix, deeds are kin, deeds are arbiters. Deed
> divides beings, that is to say by lowness and excellence.”

Not only birth in a certain plane of existence and in certain
surroundings is the result of kamma. Throughout our life we receive
unpleasant and pleasant results. Everyone would like to experience only
pleasant things through eyes, ears, nose, tongue and bodysense. However,
everyone is bound to experience both unpleasant and pleasant things
through the five senses because everyone has performed both akusala
kamma and kusala kamma.

A deed we have performed may produce a result shortly afterwards, or it
may produce a result a long time afterwards. We should remember that
volition or kamma which motivates a deed is a mental phenomenon and that
it can therefore be accumulated. Thus, it can bring about its result
later on. The Buddha taught that the akusala kamma and the kusala kamma
we have accumulated throughout our life and during countless existences
before this life, will produce their results when there are the right
conditions for the results to be produced. Vipākacitta is the result of
kamma. When we see unpleasant things, there is at that moment akusala
vipāka, which is the result of akusala kamma. This akusala vipākacitta
receives an unpleasant object through the eyes. When we see pleasant
things, the kusala vipākacitta, which is the result of kusala kamma,
receives a pleasant object through the eyes. When we hear unpleasant
things the akusala vipākacitta, which is the result of akusala kamma,
receives an unpleasant object through the ears. When we hear pleasant
things the kusala vipākacitta, which is the result of kusala kamma,
receives a pleasant object through the ears. There is vipāka every time
we see, hear, smell, taste or receive an impression through
body-contact. We cannot prevent the arising of vipākacitta; we cannot
help seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting and receiving impressions
through body-contact. Each citta, and thus also each vipākacitta, has
its own conditions; nobody can make cittas arise at will. Which
particular vipākacitta arises at the present moment is beyond control.
When one does good deeds one can be sure that those deeds will bring a
pleasant result, but the moment when the result will take place depends
on other conditions as well.

The akusala vipākacitta which experiences an unpleasant object through
the eyes, is not the same as the akusala vipākacitta which experiences
an unpleasant object through the ears. There is not a “self” who
experiences different unpleasant and pleasant objects through the five
senses. Each citta has its own conditions and it is different from all
other cittas. The more one realizes this truth, the less will one be
inclined to believe in a “self”.

Vipākacittas arise and fall away within split-seconds, like all other
types of citta. After the vipākacittas have fallen away another type of
citta arises; for example, a citta which likes or dislikes the object,
that is, lobha-mūla-citta or dosa-mūla-citta. If people do not know the
different types of cittas, they may be inclined to think that like or
dislike is still vipāka. However, like and dislike arise after the
vipākacittas have fallen away; they are not the result of kamma.
Lobha-mūla-citta or dosa-mūla-citta is not vipākacitta but akusala
citta.

Different types of citta succeed one another very rapidly. For example,
when we hear a harsh sound, the vipākacitta arises at the moment the
sound is perceived through the ears and then falls away immediately. The
moments of vipāka are extremely short. After that there may be akusala
cittas. For instance, dislike of the sound may arise, and this follows
so closely that it seems to occur at the same moment as the hearing. In
reality these cittas do not arise at the same moment. Each citta has its
own conditions and each citta performs its own function. Vipākacitta is
the result of former akusala kamma or kusala kamma. The like or dislike
after the vipāka is unwholesome. We should realize that through the
arising of akusala citta more akusala is accumulated and that this leads
to still more unwholesomeness in our lives.

Many times we may not know at which moment there is vipāka and at which
moment there is akusala citta, because we find our feelings about the
object we experience so important. The pleasant feeling which
accompanies lobha-mūla-citta and the unpleasant feeling which
accompanies dosa-mūla-citta can be so strong that we are carried away by
these feelings. Thus we cannot see things as they are.

Part of our life is spent in receiving pleasant or unpleasant results
and part of our life is spent with akusala cittas or kusala cittas which
can motivate unwholesome or wholesome deeds. These deeds condition life
in the future, they condition the results which will be received in the
future. If we have more understanding of vipāka, which is the result of
our own deeds, it will help us to be more patient when there are
unpleasant results in our life. We will not blame other people for
unpleasant vipāka we receive, because kamma is the real cause of vipāka.
We will give in less to our feelings concerning vipāka when we know the
different cittas which arise at different moments.

Indeed, the Buddha showed his great compassion in teaching people to
understand reality, in teaching them Dhamma.